---
layout: toolkit
title: Managing an agile project
permalink: /work/toolkits/agile-procurement-playbook/managing-an-agile-project
sidenav: agile_procurement_playbook
---

# Managing an agile project

This is one of the greatest challenges in terms of product delivery
risk. With a traditional procurement, the whole product’s success
typically falls to a single prime vendor. While this may sound ideal
from the government’s point of view, this doesn’t actually delegate the
risk that is incurred in delivering the product. The government
ultimately holds all of the risk, not the vendor. In an effort to
de-risk a product’s delivery, agencies need to change their traditional
approach to managing projects and be much more involved.

Much of this management is due to the multiple modular contracts that
will be issued vs a single monolithic contract. A strong government
product owner will need to understand how the modular pieces fit
together. In addition to a strong product owner, the government will
need to allow for open communication and collaboration early and often
between vendors on different contracts. This communication and
collaboration overhead can be tricky to manage.

There are a variety of
[*sources*](https://www.amazon.com/Team-Teams-Rules-Engagement-Complex/dp/1591847486)
that can help agencies embrace this new management style. In agile
terminology, a [*scrum of
scrums*](https://www.agilest.org/scaled-agile/scrum-of-scrums/) may be
necessary if there are many teams working on the same product to ensure
that information isn’t siloed and that teams are working on the right
thing at the right moment.

While management of a large agile project doesn’t directly involve the
procurement team, they should still be involved in either weekly or
monthly updates from the product team. This keeps procurement experts
informed and helps them tweak approaches for future procurements.

The shift into agile procurement can also raise questions on “what are
we actually paying for?” due to the requirements not being defined at
the onset. This shift is from the payment of tangible “things” to paying
for the commitments that have been made in the QASP. By staying in touch
with the product team, the procurement team will have ready answers to
these questions.

The awardee would have proposed a QASP filled with metrics that needed
to be met on a continuous basis and the procurement/contracting arm of
the team can hold the awardee accountable through paying towards those
metrics. This also allows the contracting team power and flexibility in
intervening quickly when/if performance is not being delivered in the
manner outlined in the QASP. Another form of accountability can come in
assigning monetary penalties for specific QASP metrics that are not met.
This would be another reason why it is important that the procurement
team is part of the whole product team throughout the development of the
product.

## Source code

Eventually, engineering will need to write code to build the product,
design will need to create wireframes and mockups for the product, and
research will need to gather insights, create journey maps, and possibly
user personas to guide the priority of the development of the product.
All of these artifacts need to be stored somewhere and often within the
federal government these artifacts were saved on vendors’
computers/servers. Access to those artifacts were many times limited due
to internal vendor IT policies.

At a minimum, the government needs to require vendors to post the source
code for the product being built in a code repository such as
[*github*](https://github.com/) or
[*bitbucket*](https://bitbucket.org/). Doing this provides transparency
for the government to see what is being built and how the overall
engineering processing is going. The code repository should be managed
by the government so as to de-risk the possibility of a vendor acting
nefariously. Once the code is version controlled, the government should
consider open-sourcing the code.

Recently, there has been a large push in the federal government to
[*open source*](https://code.gov/) the services that are being built and
there are [*many documented
benefits*](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/01/16/open-source-for-good-government/)
in doing this. Aside from the typical documented reasons why open
sourcing is beneficial, it also removes leverage from the vendor.
Information, or code, isn’t hoarded or kept secretive in a way that only
a single vendor can continue to develop a product.
