---
layout: toolkit
title: Agile Procurement Playbook
permalink: /work/toolkits/agile-procurement-playbook/
sidenav: agile_procurement_playbook
---

**Agile Procurement Handbook**
==============================

Purpose of this handbook
------------------------

The purpose of this handbook is to introduce an agile procurement model
for software services, cover how it differs from some of the more
traditional procurement plays, and introduce an iterative roadmap on
transitioning towards a more agile procurement environment. While the
handbook can help government contracting teams strategize on new
procurements, this information is best treated as helpful suggestions
rather than strict guidance.

### Intended audience

An agile procurement strategy includes stakeholders that traditionally
might not have had a seat at the table during a product’s initial
planning phases. Because the strategy requires a greater understanding
of a product’s objectives and goals along with the adoption of a modular
contracting approach, the following roles will need to have early input
on new products that will be requiring procurements:

-   Agency contracting officer/specialist who is supporting the product,

-   Agency product manager, and

-   The agency’s digital services team of engineering, design, and
    > research.

This procurement strategy is most effective when these roles act as a
single team supporting the overall product.

Executive summary
-----------------

In a quick overview of the US federal IT project landscape,
[*Brookings*](https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2015/08/25/doomed-challenges-and-solutions-to-government-it-projects/)
reported that in 2014:

-   \$75.6 billion was spent on IT per year — this is more than the
    > entire venture capital industry spends annually combined.

-   94% of the projects are over budget or behind schedule.

-   40% of the projects are scrapped or abandoned.

Setting up the correct contracting strategy has the largest impact on
the probability of success on most government products. Because of this
importance, it’s essential to measure performance indicators tracking
towards outcomes in order to:

-   Set direction and monitor the progress of the work, and

-   Intervene promptly when progress isn’t tracking towards the
    > product’s objectives.

Procurement flexibility is the substrate underlying successful project
management. Procurement flexibility can be defined as the ability to:

-   Award new tasks quickly,

-   Shorten the initial period of performance,

-   Optimize for contracts that speed digital service delivery for end
    > users, and

-   Have a diverse pool of quality vendors that has digital service
    > experience to draw from.

The overarching goal for every procurement is presumably to deliver
defined, expected outcomes for the product or service being procured.
But the procurement strategy determines the amount of risk assumed in
pursuit of that goal.

An agile procurement approach reduces the risks of product development
by tailoring procurements to the products being built to meet the user’s
needs rather than having a generic procurement structure. Ultimately,
this requires integrating the procurement team into the product
management team.

What is agile procurement?
--------------------------

Agile procurement is a procurement strategy that focuses on issuing
contracts quickly as well as de-risking the overall product by ensuring
that only the required services/features are being built in rapid
iterations for the correct users.

As contracts increase in scope and size, the ability to quickly award
those contracts diminishes greatly. Likewise, the smaller the scope of a
contract, the faster it can be awarded. An agile procurement strategy
favors breaking up large monolithic contracts into smaller well-defined
components called modules. The modules are pieces of work that are
required for the product’s success, such as:

-   Conducting user research to ensure the right services are being
    > built,

-   Designing to ensure that the end user is at the center of all
    > development, and

-   Engineering to build out any services that might be required.

When an agency is starting a new initiative or modernizing an existing
system, it’s expected and normal to be unsure about the ideal order for
awarding all of the module contracts. There are typically a few known
tasks that will be required (e.g. starting to build out a basic cloud
infrastructure, interviewing prospective users of the product, etc.)
that can be the first sets of modular contracts awarded. While that work
is underway, the agency stakeholders can build and maintain a product
roadmap for the rest of the contracts needed to complete the product.

Guiding principles of an agile procurement
------------------------------------------

Both the [*United States Digital Service*](https://usds.gov/) and
[*18F*](https://18f.gsa.gov/) provide great
[*overviews*](https://techfarhub.cio.gov/learning-center/principles/) of
the
[*principles*](https://github.com/18F/technology-budgeting/blob/master/handbook.md)
that guide generic agile procurement. The principles generally fall into
the following buckets that are fundamental for an agile procurement
strategy:

-   Keep procurements small and quick,

-   Buy digital service skill sets, not software, and

-   Embrace a [*one-team, one-dream
    > mindset*](#working-together-building-an-agile-culture).

USDS’s principles of procurement are a [*great launching
pad*](https://playbook.cio.gov/#play5) for an agency contracting
specialist who’s rethinking traditional procurement approaches. The goal
is to mirror the procurement process after the way software is delivered
in an agile format. For contracting specialists, this means focusing on
procuring skill sets that can build software.

### How it differs from other procurements

An agile procurement strategy is distinct from other procurement
strategies, such as the common waterfall strategy in these primary
areas:

-   Size of the contracts being awarded,

-   Time it takes to award contracts,

-   Level of early involvement from product stakeholders, and

-   Expectations and timing for requirements gathering.

Because contracts are modularized and smaller, it’s essential to have
input from the product team (engineering, design, research, product)
right from the start to ensure the objectives for each contract are well
known. In agile procurement, no one department or stakeholder can
function as a silo.

The approach to requirements gathering is also fundamentally different.
An agile procurement strategy recognizes that:

-   The team’s understanding of the product will develop as the product
    > is being built, and

<!-- -->

-   This growing understanding can inform the requirements for the
    > current and subsequent modular contracts.

Therefore, the procurement team doesn’t attempt to have all of the
technical requirements defined up front. An agile procurement strategy
relies on the team having a greater understanding of the product as the
product is being built, and that new knowledge can be turned into
contractual requirements for a modular contract.

### Modular contracting

The process of modular contracting matches the natural work streams that
arise out of building a product. Let’s use an example to explore the
differences between traditional and agile procurement approaches.

**Requirement**: Move significant portions of DMV services online

**Traditional procurement approach**:

-   Gather 100% of the requirements up front.

-   Write a statement of work against the gathered requirements.

-   Award the contract to a single prime contractor that could have
    > multiple subcontractors underneath them.

-   Set a long initial period of performance in which the vendor should
    > deliver working software at the end of it.

**Agile procurement approach**:

-   Recognize the complexity of the ask (moving DMV services online).

-   Identify the different components necessary to accomplish the goal —
    > like cloud infrastructure, research and design, and backend
    > development .

-   Break up the product into discrete parts as they become known and
    > use modular contracts to procure services against those.

There are many benefits to using a modular contracting strategy:

-   The government [*isn't dependent on a single prime
    > vendor*](#vendor-lock-in-risk-mitigation) to deliver services.

-   The period of performance can be shortened to protect the
    > government, since it’s much easier to replace an underperforming
    > vendor for a single component than it is to replace an
    > all-encompassing contractor.

-   It results in a pool of expert vendors for the product being built,
    > broadening the options available for contracting out new work.

-   Vendors have to focus on delivering working software in a shorter
    > time frame, providing tangible benefits much sooner.

Of course, with any procurement approach, there are drawbacks. The
approach requires a higher level of effort for project management, since
the government will need to:

-   Manage more contracts,

-   Provide strong coordination/leadership to orchestrate the different
    > contracts and vendors on the product, and

-   Involve more people to manage the extra moving pieces introduced
    > through modular contracting.

#### Vendor lock-in risk mitigation

Traditional procurement cycles for waterfall software development
typically require a significant initial investment in both time and
money before any working software is delivered. It may even be years
before any software is delivered, with the added risk of the software
behaving differently than initially expected or not working at all.

This frontloaded time investment — combined with the lack of visibility
into the development process — may put the government in a difficult
position when the time comes to evaluate the completed software. If the
end product doesn’t effectively address users’ needs, the government is
on the hook for the resources that have already been sunk into the
project.

The smaller, shorter contracts in an agile procurement strategy reduce
the government’s risk. With shorter contracts, the period of performance
is decreased and the vendor needs to produce value to the government
much more rapidly. If the government feels that the vendor’s products
aren’t meeting expectations, the government has the flexibility to not
extend any option periods.

### How to know you’re ready for agile procurement

Testing out or adopting a new procurement strategy takes buy-in and
support from a variety of stakeholders. This environmental buy-in is no
different for agile procurement. If you’re considering an agile
procurement strategy for an upcoming product, these questions can help
determine whether the agency is ready:

-   Do you have examples of when the current procurement strategy didn’t
    > support a product’s chances of success?

-   Is the upcoming product for development risky? (e.g. high budget,
    > mission-critical service, long development timeline, etc.)

-   Does the current procurement strategy help mitigate the risks in
    > product development and delivery?

-   Does the current procurement strategy contribute to the probability
    > of success for the product?

By conducting an [*analysis of
alternatives*](#appendix-e-sample-analysis-of-procurement-options) on
the different procurement options for a particular product, the product
team can involve stakeholders in the decision-making process and
increase buy-in if the team opts to test out a new strategy.

As with trying out any new method, start small. This will allow
stakeholders to become comfortable with the new process and way of
procuring services. Once you have some experience and more buy-in, you
can scale up to larger initiatives.

Because procurement is such a vital part of the government’s ability to
provide services, changing the current culture of procurement is a long
game and not something that can happen overnight. Culture change can be
hard, but the effort is worth it given the potential to de-risk service
or product delivery by changing how it’s procured.

Standing up a team to guide the procurement process
---------------------------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, a cross-functional team is needed to get the most
out of an agile procurement strategy. The following roles are needed.

### Leadership

Adjusting to new procurement strategies requires leadership support and
buy-in. Leadership will need to actively support the procurement team as
they:

-   Try out flexible and creative approaches and solutions to
    > procurement and contracting,

-   Work across traditional government silos, and

-   Potentially ruffle some feathers as the product team introduces new
    > ways of building products and services.

### Building a cross-functional procurement team

The ideal procurement team is both lean and multi-disciplinary. To
increase your chances of success, you’ll want to include the roles we
describe below.

#### Product owner

The product owner is [*responsible and
accountable*](https://playbook.cio.gov/#play6) for the overall success
of the product. This person usually runs the day-to-day project work and
sets priorities based on stakeholder feedback.

While some positions on the team may be outsourced, the product owner
must be a government employee.

#### Procurement specialist

This team member is an expert in your agency’s contracting methods. They
work closely with the other members of the team to understand the
product’s objectives, goals, and needs, and to optimize procurements
accordingly.

#### User researcher

A user researcher will help the team identify, understand, and
prioritize the knowledge gaps that you’ll need to fill. With all
products, there are:

-   Known knowns,

-   Known unknowns, and most dangerously,

-   Unknown unknowns.

If a product is large, there are going to be gaps of understanding in
areas of design, development, and user research. The user researcher
will work with the product owner to define the initial steps to
incorporate into procurement requirements.

#### Engineer

Chances are, you’re using agile procurement to build a digital service —
an informational website, an online service that users will interact
with, or internal systems/tools to support the agency’s mission.

The engineer lead will work with the product owner to lay out the
fundamental building blocks needed to support the product. They will
identify the skill sets needed for the first round of procurements, such
as experts in cloud infrastructure, databases, or APIs.

### Working together: building an agile culture

One of the core tenets of an agile culture is that it requires teams to
be highly collaborative. This can be a significant change in the way
that agencies currently execute projects. For larger organizations, it’s
common to see a functional or matrixed structure. While it makes sense
at the organization’s top level to organize itself in this way, it
increases risk when building a specific product or service.

Agency departments that are traditionally siloed from other departments
will need to cross-collaborate. Terminology can help shift mindsets and
habits. Instead of referring to agency departments (OIT, Procurement,
etc.), agile culture suggests that agencies think in terms of product
teams. The product team should consist of all of the disciplines
required to deliver the product.

A one-team, one-dream mentality, which considers every person to being
is necessary even across the different vendors that support a product’s
development. The government will be responsible for managing these
vendor relationships, and it will be in their best interest to treat
every vendor supporting the product as if they were on a single team.

The importance of creating cross-functional teams can’t be overstated.
The overall success of the product will depend on how well the team is
able to function. Leadership can support effective collaboration by
investing in the tools and workspaces that help team members come
together.

**For more on building an agile culture, check out:**

-   [*How to Build a Sustainable Agile
    > Culture*](https://www.cmswire.com/digital-workplace/how-to-build-a-sustainable-agile-culture/)

-   [*The five trademarks of agile
    > organizations*](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/the-five-trademarks-of-agile-organizations)

-   [*How To (Really) Build An Agile Culture Through Coaching
    > Skills*](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbescoachescouncil/2018/02/27/how-to-really-build-an-agile-culture-through-coaching-skills/#4a4327dd1e1e)

Phases of an agile procurement
------------------------------

The phases of an agile procurement are flexible, but they typically
follow this pattern when starting the procurement process for a new
product:

-   Defining the goals and objectives of the product

-   Understanding the skills required for development

-   Drafting the Statement of Objectives (vs. the Statement of Work)

-   Planning the proposal evaluation process

-   Evaluating proposals

-   Meeting with unsuccessful vendors

Another approach would be to use these key questions to guide the
process:

-   [*What is the scope of the project? What are the key
    > deliverables?*](#aligning-on-goals-and-strategy)

-   [*What are the objectives and milestones? How frequent are
    > they?*](#drafting-a-statement-of-objectives-vs.-a-statement-of-work)

-   [*What are the performance metrics defined in the
    > contract*](#quality-management-plan-qmp)? (e.g., response time,
    > system uptime, time period to address priority issues)

### Defining the goals and objectives

Before thinking about a procurement approach, the government must first
understand the needs, goals, mission, and rough scope of the product
that needs to be built. Representatives of product, engineering,
research, and procurement will need to participate in defining the
project plan. This collaborative effort ensures that each community of
practice (e.g. design, research, engineering) has full context before
making recommendations on the specific areas where the community will
support the product.

#### Aligning on goals and strategy

When products involve multiple parties or stakeholders, it’s a good idea
to have working sessions early on in the process to ground all parties
on the mission, vision, and goals of the product. By getting everyone on
the same page at the beginning of the procurement process, the team will
avoid costly assumptions down the road.

These working sessions will align stakeholders on:

-   What is being built,

-   Why it’s being built, and

-   Who it’s being built for.

Frameworks such as
[*CATWOE*](https://www.brighthubpm.com/methods-strategies/105917-catwoe-analysis-how-amp-when-to-use-it/)
can help identify areas of the development process that could be a
source of conflict between stakeholders. Finding these areas of possible
conflict early is much like catching software bugs early in development
— the [*cost of fixing is exponentially
more*](https://deepsource.io/blog/exponential-cost-of-fixing-bugs/) the
longer a source of conflict isn’t addressed.

Once the team has a good understanding of the goals and objectives of
the product or service, the procurement team can tailor a strategy to
the product. That might include evaluating the necessity of custom
development versus off-the-shelf solutions or determining the
performance period timeline to gain a better understanding of the value
that is delivered against the calendar.

For particularly complex procurements, having a
[*RACI*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Responsibility_assignment_matrix)
helps the whole team have a clear understanding of roles and
responsibilities.

### Understanding the skills required for development

Once the team has a common understanding of the overall picture, the
team needs to start thinking about how to build the product. This is
where much of the specific procurement work begins.

#### Research

With all products, there's a variety of possible solutions. In this
phase, the team will explore what the needs are for the product and look
into answering basic questions such as:

-   Who are the end users of the system and what are their expectations?

-   Does there need to be custom development?

-   Is there a comparable service already available? (i.e. We wouldn’t
    > build a point-of-sale system by hand if a service like
    > [*Square*](https://squareup.com) would meet the needs.)

-   Are there development teams that specialize in the type of
    > development needed?

The basic answers to these questions will help guide any market research
needed.

##### Market research

At the beginning of the procurement process for digital services, it can
be difficult to have a good understanding of the large bucket of product
development requirements. This is a great time to solicit feedback from
the vendor community. When asking for vendor input, the government
should be specific about the product goals. This will help the vendor
community provide detailed feedback about how they would approach and —
ultimately solve — some of the problems that the government will face
when building out digital services.

While it’s valuable to see how industry would approach solutions, it’s
more important to see what skill sets they would require for their
solutions. Ultimately, this is what the government should target for
their procurement — the communities of practice that are required to
deliver the product.

Engaging with vendors can be as formal as a request for information
(RFI) or as informal as grabbing a cup of coffee and having a
conversation. Vendors will be happy to provide information no matter the
method. Typically, the more informal the engagement, the faster the
turnaround is for answering requirement questions. Also, the informal
nature can be helpful in putting a face to government employees and
building stronger relationships with vendors.

#### Outreach

In an effort to continue to build relationships with the vendor
community, there are a variety of ways the government can engage. The
stronger the government’s network is with possible vendors, the more
options it will have when it comes to procurements. This diversification
is another way to help de-risk the government as a whole.

Reaching out to industry prior to any procurement is perfectly
acceptable and encouraged. Not only does this give the government a
better idea of the skill sets that are available on the market to
accomplish any goals that it might have, it gives the industry an idea
on what the government values, where it might be going in terms of
digital transformation, and how to best position itself to meet the
needs of the government.

##### Industry day

Industry days can get a great way to bring together the vendor community
for a day or two to share trends, products, services, and overall ideas.
They provide interested vendors the opportunity to meet the government’s
program and procurement officials. In addition, these types of events
provide the small business community the opportunity to engage with
agency prime contractors, talk with government small business
representatives, network with other vendors, and increase their
awareness of the contracting opportunities available within different
agencies. Industry days should be open to all industries and business
classifications. Attendees will market their products/services, attend
business workshops, and participate in one-on-one matchmaking sessions.

##### Attracting a diverse set of vendors (non-traditional vendors)

##### The small business community can often be overlooked due to possible lack of past experience within the government. These vendors are an incredible source of information and can provide a set of fresh eyes on development as well as bringing current industry best practices into the government. Many of these vendors are experts in providing and delivering digital services.

### Drafting a Statement of Objectives (vs. a Statement of Work)

All procurement strategies require a main description of the work that’s
being procured. This description is typically documented in either a
statement of work (SOW) or a statement of objectives (SOO). This is
where the procurement strategy should map to the development
methodology.

For an agile approach, the feedback and revision loop needs to be quick
so that the team can regularly assess value and determine what needs to
be built next. This feedback loop or reevaluating is in conflict with a
traditional SOW because the team is constantly reevaluating what’s next,
versus sticking with what was predicted up front.

#### Statement of work (SOW)

Traditionally, SOWs dictate what is going to be built and how it’s going
to be built. SOWs use language that is explicitly binding (i.e. Vendor
SHALL produce a white paper on progress on the last day of every month).

SOWs are written under the assumption that 100% (or near 100%) of
requirements have been gathered and will not change. While this approach
is appropriate for goods and services that are somewhat static and have
been procured by the government for years, this approach is far too
restrictive when building a digital product. The most advanced technical
companies such as Google, Facebook, and Apple don’t attempt to build
products with a 100% understanding of the requirements up front.

#### Statement of objectives (SOO)

A SOO is a much better fit for agile development. Shifting from an SOW
to an SOO is a shift from a document explaining, “this is what you
**need** to do” to one that says “here are the objectives for this
product.” The goal of the procurement is to bring in experts to help
determine what needs to be built, this includes understanding the needs
of the users driven through research and discovery, and the best way to
go about building it in order to meet the objectives.

When thinking about an SOO, the government should focus on defining the
mission, vision, and goals of the product or service. Procurement
against a SOO provides more flexibility for making changes to the
product during the the development lifecycle. While changes to the
product will be frequent, the goals and objectives of the product will
not change. By focusing the procurement towards an SOO, the government
avoids having to constantly modify existing contracts as it gains new
information and insights.

For an example of an SOO, see [*Appendix
F*](#appendix-f-sample-statement-of-objectives)

### Planning the proposal evaluation process

As we’ve discussed, agile procurement focuses on acquiring the skill
sets needed to meet product objectives. Therefore, the proposal process
needs to provide the review team with information that allows them to
compare and contrast the skills of the vendor pool. This section
describes the tools for getting the right types of information from
vendors.

#### Design challenge

This is the classic “show, don’t tell” part of the procurement. The
design challenge is arguably the single most important part of the
procurement evaluation process. Because each procurement is different,
the challenges need to be customized to align with the key components of
the SOO.

To get the most accurate insight into each vendor’s ability to
successfully execute against the product’s objectives, craft a challenge
that closely matches the type of work that will be involved in the
product development. If the procurement is for a very technical product
or service, the challenge should be technical. For example, it could be
building a data pipeline that connects to a variety of government legacy
databases. Alternatively, if the procurement will be product management
heavy, the challenge could include building out a product roadmap with
prioritized milestones.

The government will need to come up with a realistic scenario that
vendors can respond to with either working software, design artifacts
(e.g. wireframes), product management approaches (e.g. product
milestones and backlog of prioritized work), or any other range of
artifacts that will be essential for the specific procurement.

For an example of a design challenge, see [*Appendix
D*](#appendix-d-example-design-challenges)

#### Quality Management Plan (QMP)

A QMP ensures that the government and vendor have a clear, common
understanding of expectations for delivering product artifacts
(software, wireframes, user research findings, etc). It includes:

-   Specifics about how the government will evaluate the vendor’s
    > performance metrics (called a quality assurance surveillance
    > plan),

-   Roles and responsibilities for enforcing those metrics, and

-   The vendor’s planned response if metrics aren’t met (called a
    > quality control plan) — for example, there could be financial
    > impacts tied to some of the performance metrics.

Much of the QMP can be captured in a single table. The vendor will have
to come up with most — if not all — of the performance metrics they are
to be measured on.

For a Quality Management Plan template, refer to [*Appendix
B*](#appendix-b-list-of-templates)

##### Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan (QASP)

A QASP consists of a roles and responsibilities section that describes
the formal relationship between the vendor and the Government’s
contracting specialist/officer. It will also describe the performance
metrics the vendor will adhere to based on their proposal. The
performance metrics will also describe how the Government can verify
each metric.

While the roles and responsibilities included in a QASP tend to be
fairly static across modular procurements, the performance metrics
should both be generic and also tailored to the product that is being
delivered by the vendor. A good QASP will have objective-based
performance metrics. These performance metrics can come in many forms,
including progress towards a desired result, the dependability of
something, or the security of a system.

The measurement of these performance metrics is important, and it should
be easy. An effective performance metric avoids generalized goals like,
“improvement user research.” Instead, an effective metric should be
based on a solid, focused goal that can produce qualitative and
quantitative measurements. A good example would be “All web pages shall
load in under 3 seconds measured at the 95th and 99th percentile.”

##### Quality Control Plan (QCP)

A QCP is the other side to the QASP performance metric coin. It
describes how the vendor plans to respond to each metric that is not
being met. Like the QASP, the QCP should include the concrete actions
that will be taken under specific circumstances.

#### Additional Plays

##### Page limits

Just as gases expand to fill the container they're in, proposals expand
to reach the maximum page limit. Boilerplate text doesn’t add value to
proposals, but the time it takes to read it is costly when evaluating
proposals. Imposing strict page limits forces vendors to prioritize the
information they deem important, and it saves the government hours on
potentially zero-value add content. A proposal limit of 10 pages is
often sufficient.

### Evaluating proposals

Once the solicitation has been posted, there will be a window when
vendors are putting together their responses. The product team can use
this time to put together the team that will go through all of the
proposals submitted.

Depending on the urgency of the procurement and the number of proposals
received, the government has a couple of options for setting up the
review process.

##### Group review

If there’s a large number of proposals, evaluators could review the
proposals in real-time as a group. This approach helps evaluators keep
pace with each other, but it also introduces the possibility for
group-think bias. Some people will read faster than others, which can
cause others to rush in their personal analysis. And the logistics of
aligning people’s schedules for large blocks of time can add to the
total time it takes to review proposals.

##### Individual review

The evaluating group can agree to read through proposals on their own
time and schedule regular check-ins. The team will use these check-ins
to quickly provide thoughts and feedback on the proposals they’ve read.
This model will typically be faster than reviewing as a group, because
the feedback sessions are much shorter than the time necessary to do the
evaluation.

The check-ins can be remote/call-in meetings if that’s more practical.
While it’s always nice to see people face-to-face, it typically isn’t
required. This also speeds up the process of evaluation.

#### Technical Evaluation Panel (TEP)

In the federal procurement process, it’s common to have a technical
evaluation panel (TEP) select the winning proposal.

A TEP is a group of subject matter experts (SMEs) from the
agency/government that reviews each proposal’s non-price merits and
ultimately makes a selection and recommendation to the acquisition
office for awarding the contract. Following receipt of Quotes, the TEP
will perform an analysis on a factor-by-factor basis, noting the
positive and negative aspects of each proposal, and assigning each
proposal a score based on [*an agreed upon
method*](#appendix-c-examples-of-tep-rating-systems).

SMEs are experts in research, design, engineering, or any other subject.
These individuals may have years of experience in private industry or be
active individual contributors for their respective discipline on
government projects. Make sure that the designated SMEs are actually
SMEs. They will have the ability to provide in-depth analysis on design
challenge submissions and be able to back that analysis with industry
research and best practices.

The TEP team, like the team for the procurement process mentioned
previously, needs to be a cross-functional team comprised of different
communities of practices that are going to be necessary in delivering a
successful product. This team is arguably one of the most important
teams involved in the process of selecting the correct vendor for the
contract. This team of experts will evaluate, document, and ultimately
make recommendations on who they think best suited to successfully
deliver the product in question.

#### Down-select

The down-select process is a very powerful tool in the agency’s
acquisition toolbelt that saves time for both the government and vendors
and dramatically decreases the probability of protest coming from a
vendor. The down-select can be used for individual procurements as well
as for developing a contracting vehicle such as a blanket purchase
agreement (BPA).

The down-select is a phase in the procurement lifecycle that requires
the evaluation of some information (e.g. past experience, technical
skill sets, etc.) to determine the likelihood of a vendor’s success in
winning the contract. The down-select can be either mandatory or
voluntary.

-   In a **mandatory down-select** process, the government notifies a
    > subsection of the applicant pool that they’re not going to be
    > considered and are being removed from the procurement process.

-   In a **voluntary down-select** process, the government notifies a
    > subsection of the pool that they should consider not proceeding
    > through the rest of the procurement process based on the TEPs
    > findings.

When the government gives transparent feedback to vendors throughout the
process — including when some proposals have a low probability of
winning — this allows vendors to decide whether they want to put more
time and resources into the procurement process. Without this feedback,
vendors may feel like they might have wasted time and be understandably
upset.

The government can benefit through the terms/language in which it
evaluates whether vendors are down-selected. [*Appendix
C*](#appendix-c-examples-of-tep-rating-systems) provides an example of
how the government can be transparent about the down-select criteria.

#### Selection and award

At the end of reviewing a proposal and design challenge, if included,
the TEP needs to reach a rough consensus on the best submission that
will have the highest probability of success in delivering the product
or service for the government.

#### Meeting with unsuccessful vendors

This is probably one of the most important, yet most awkward phases of
the post-award procurement process. The procurement team should schedule
face-to-face meetings (called retrospectives) with each of the vendors
that didn’t win. The vendors can choose to take the meeting or ignore
it.

The overall goal of offering these meetings is to make the next
procurement process even more competitive. During a retrospective, the
government provides the vendor with feedback on how their proposals and
design challenge submissions can be improved for future submissions.
Many times, the vendor will also provide feedback to the government
about the procurement process, which is extremely valuable to help
improve future procurements.

Finally, procurement retrospectives reduce the likelihood that vendors
will protest the award. Vendors make significant investments in bids,
and they want to know how they can increase their chances of winning
next time. In the absence of feedback, they can only guess at where they
fell short. By putting in the time and effort to communicate with
unsuccessful vendors, the government builds a vendor pool that better
understands its needs and expectations.

Managing an agile project
-------------------------

This is one of the greatest challenges in terms of product delivery
risk. With a traditional procurement, the whole product’s success
typically falls to a single prime vendor. While this may sound ideal
from the government’s point of view, this doesn’t actually delegate the
risk that is incurred in delivering the product. The government
ultimately holds all of the risk, not the vendor. In an effort to
de-risk a product’s delivery, agencies need to change their traditional
approach to managing projects and be much more involved.

Much of this management is due to the multiple modular contracts that
will be issued vs a single monolithic contract. A strong government
product owner will need to understand how the modular pieces fit
together. In addition to a strong product owner, the government will
need to allow for open communication and collaboration early and often
between vendors on different contracts. This communication and
collaboration overhead can be tricky to manage.

There are a variety of
[*sources*](https://www.amazon.com/Team-Teams-Rules-Engagement-Complex/dp/1591847486)
that can help agencies embrace this new management style. In agile
terminology, a [*scrum of
scrums*](https://www.agilest.org/scaled-agile/scrum-of-scrums/) may be
necessary if there are many teams working on the same product to ensure
that information isn’t siloed and that teams are working on the right
thing at the right moment.

While management of a large agile project doesn’t directly involve the
procurement team, they should still be involved in either weekly or
monthly updates from the product team. This keeps procurement experts
informed and helps them tweak approaches for future procurements.

The shift into agile procurement can also raise questions on “what are
we actually paying for?” due to the requirements not being defined at
the onset. This shift is from the payment of tangible “things” to paying
for the commitments that have been made in the QASP. By staying in touch
with the product team, the procurement team will have ready answers to
these questions.

The awardee would have proposed a QASP filled with metrics that needed
to be met on a continuous basis and the procurement/contracting arm of
the team can hold the awardee accountable through paying towards those
metrics. This also allows the contracting team power and flexibility in
intervening quickly when/if performance is not being delivered in the
manner outlined in the QASP. Another form of accountability can come in
assigning monetary penalties for specific QASP metrics that are not met.
This would be another reason why it is important that the procurement
team is part of the whole product team throughout the development of the
product.

### Source code

Eventually, engineering will need to write code to build the product,
design will need to create wireframes and mockups for the product, and
research will need to gather insights, create journey maps, and possibly
user personas to guide the priority of the development of the product.
All of these artifacts need to be stored somewhere and often within the
federal government these artifacts were saved on vendors’
computers/servers. Access to those artifacts were many times limited due
to internal vendor IT policies.

At a minimum, the government needs to require vendors to post the source
code for the product being built in a code repository such as
[*github*](https://github.com/) or
[*bitbucket*](https://bitbucket.org/). Doing this provides transparency
for the government to see what is being built and how the overall
engineering processing is going. The code repository should be managed
by the government so as to de-risk the possibility of a vendor acting
nefariously. Once the code is version controlled, the government should
consider open-sourcing the code.

Recently, there has been a large push in the federal government to
[*open source*](https://code.gov/) the services that are being built and
there are [*many documented
benefits*](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/01/16/open-source-for-good-government/)
in doing this. Aside from the typical documented reasons why open
sourcing is beneficial, it also removes leverage from the vendor.
Information, or code, isn’t hoarded or kept secretive in a way that only
a single vendor can continue to develop a product.

Agile acquisition case study
----------------------------

### Medicare Payment Systems Modernization (MPSM)

#### Project background

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is the largest
medical insurer in the world. CMS pays providers roughly \$500 billion
dollars a year for fee-for-service claims. The systems that handled
these payments were running on outdated technology, were extremely
fragile when making updates, and inhibited the ability to quickly make
changes to healthcare policy.

CMS had tried to modernize these systems three separate times in the
past, and all attempts resulted in various degrees of failure. The
attempts to modernize all involved waterfall approaches to software
delivery. Two of the three planned for a big bang[^1] switch between
systems and resulted in lost data, system downtime, and business logic
that did not match the original legacy system. CMS was forced to roll
back all efforts to the original system to ensure that payments were
still being made.

Meanwhile, the effort to simply maintain these critical systems became
so resource-intensive that there was no actionable roadmap for
modernizing them. The continued maintenance and development of the
system was driven through a traditional SOW that required many contract
modifications to include new work as it came to light. The contract
value was hundreds of millions of dollars over the course of five years.

#### Project scope

The need for modernization didn’t go away with the failed attempts. CMS
decided to look at different approaches for modernization that would be
smaller, less risky, and deliver business value in months instead of
years. The scope of the project had to be broken into two parts to cover
a longer-term initiative as well as a smaller, discretely-scoped body of
work.

CMS started by defining goals to guide the whole modernization effort.
Once a set of goals was defined, they created a rough, long-term vision
and identified specific pieces of work that could get underway in the
immediate term.

CMS decided to start by moving to a cloud-based infrastructure. The
claims processing system was running on powerful, expensive mainframe
computers. By moving from mainframe computers to the cloud, CMS would be
able to:

-   Cut down on the cost of computing,

-   Make changes to the programs in a modular fashion instead of having
    > to make edits to the monolithic codebase,

-   Change pieces of the system at a much more rapid pace, and

-   Provide real-time analytics and feedback to the CMS policy team.

To do this successfully, CMS needed a new approach to procurement that
could deliver business value much more rapidly than before.

#### The procurement strategy

Because the modernization initiative was going to be a long, multi-year
effort, CMS needed a contracting vehicle that could be tailored to
support the project’s short- and long-term objectives.

CMS put together an analysis of alternatives to help them decide which
vehicle would be best suited to supporting the new procurement needs.
(See [*Appendix
E*](#appendix-e-sample-analysis-of-procurement-options)). Ultimately,
they selected a blanket purchase agreement (BPA) as the best vehicle to:

-   Quickly create a small pool of vendors that would become experts in
    > the system,

-   Allow for rapidly issuing modular contracts, and

-   Bake common requirements into each contract into the BPA to avoid
    > copying and pasting common language into each SOO and vendor
    > proposal.

Constructing the BPA required an analysis of the types of skill sets
that would be necessary to successfully execute on the long-term vision
of MPSM. CMS didn’t understand — nor did it attempt to try to understand
— all of the requirements that would be necessary for the initiative.
And because CMS was at the very beginning of the project, they
recognized the possibility that the objectives could change over the
project’s lifetime. CMS elected to write a performance work statement
(PWS) for the BPA that outlined the skill sets it needed to work on this
modernization initiative. This would clear the way for CMS to write SOOs
for the specific modular contracts that would be awarded through the
BPA.

#### Awarding the BPA

The PWS in the BPA consisted of a mix of requirements that included the
vendor’s ability to:

-   Develop software in an agile fashion,

-   Demonstrate the ability to conduct modern user research and product
    > development, and

-   Show how user-centered design was plugged into the development
    > lifecycle.

CMS knew that all of these skills would be necessary in the successful
delivery of the modernization effort. The BPA also included a
past-performance requirement, a voluntary down-select phase, and a
design challenge phase. There were roughly 100 vendors to start, and a
large percentage of the overall pool was eliminated at each phase. By
the design challenge phase, only 15 vendors remained.

Once CMS had a good idea of the skills that would be necessary, they
wrote a [*design challenge*](#appendix-d-example-design-challenges) that
closely matched the first sets of work that would be coming through the
BPA. The challenge required vendors to prove that they could execute on
all of the different disciplines. By taking this approach, CMS could be
assured that all vendors awarded a spot on the BPA would be ready to
work in an agile fashion, saving time down the road.

#### Modular contracting

Now that CMS had a contracting vehicle in place to support the product
through its lifetime, it shifted focus to individual pieces of work.
Modular contracting was vital for CMS to chunk out the work as it came
up during the process of modernization.

#### The outcome (so far…)

It’s early days for this new approach at CMS, but there are some
promising signs. The first modular contract to come out of the newly
created BPA was for building the cloud infrastructure that all future
development could be built on top of. CMS was able to competitively bid
this task of work to all of the BPA winners and award the contract **in
less than 45 days** from initial inception.

#### Summary

CMS had a complicated problem to solve on a massive scale. By shifting
to an agile approach, the agency is able to:

-   Retain flexibility for the modernization effort — even at this
    > massive scale,

-   Reduce the risks inherent in putting all resources into one vendor’s
    > hands,

-   Adapt its approach to align with the changes in technology and best
    > practice that are inevitable over such a long-term initiative.

Appendix A: Short introduction to agile software development
------------------------------------------------------------

Agile is a time-bound, iterative approach to software delivery that
builds software incrementally from the start of the project, instead of
trying to deliver all at once. There is typically a cadence called
sprints in which the team commits to delivering artifacts at the end of
each for review. These artifacts can be working software, user personas,
wireframes, etc.

By taking this approach of delivering working software at the end of
each sprint, progress can be closely monitored and course corrected
throughout the lifetime of the product. This iterative approach to
product and software development focuses on de-risking the ultimate
delivery of product. This approach will require more involvement from
key stakeholders to ensure that the product is on track towards
delivery.

Appendix B: List of templates
-----------------------------

### Quality Metric Plan Template

QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (QMP)

**Introduction**

[]{#_gjdgxs .anchor}This Quality Management Plan (QMP), which contains a
Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan (QASP) and Quality Control Plan
(QCP) is pursuant to the requirements listed in the performance-based
\[Performance Work Statement (PWS) or Statement of Objectives (SOO)\]
for \[program that the procurement is being ran against\], agile
development services. This performance-based plan sets forth the
procedures and guidelines the \[agency name\] will use in evaluating the
technical performance of the contractor’s services as required beneath
the Task Order.

After acceptance of the quality management plan the Vendor shall receive
the Government Contracting Officer’s acceptance in writing of any
proposed change to his Quality Control system.

**Purpose**

This QMP has been developed to evaluate Vendor actions while
implementing this \[PWS or SOO\]. It is designed to provide an effective
surveillance method of monitoring Vendor performance for each listed
deliverable. By employing a fully developed QMP, the Government and the
Vendor achieve an understanding of performance expectations and how
performance will be measured against those expectations.

The QMP is designed to define roles and responsibilities, identify the
performance objectives, define the methodologies used to monitor and
evaluate the contractor’s performance, describe quality assurance
reporting, and describe analysis of quality assurance monitoring
results.

The goals for the quality management plan are to provide the best means
to ensure contract standards and deliverables meet their stated
requirements and project management processes are appropriately followed
to maintain a high metric of performance and quality.

**Performance Management Strategy**

The contractor’s internal quality control system will set forth the
staffing and procedures for self inspecting the quality, timeliness,
responsiveness, customer satisfaction, and other performance
requirements in the PWS. The contractor will utilize its internal
quality control system to assess and report their performance to the
designated Government representative.

The Government representative will monitor performance and review
performance reports furnished by the contractor to determine how the
contractor is performing against communicated performance objectives.
The Government will make decisions based on performance measurement
metric data and notify the contractor of those decisions. The contractor
will be responsible for making required changes in processes and
practices to ensure performance is managed effectively.

**Roles and Responsibilities**

The Contracting Officer (CO) is responsible for monitoring contract
compliance, contract administration and cost control; and resolving any
differences between the observations documented by the Contracting
Officer’s Representative (COR) and the contractor’s performance.

The CO will designate one full-time COR as the Government authority for
performance management. The number of additional representatives serving
as Technical Inspectors, such as respective Product Owner(s), depends
upon the complexity of the services measured as well as the contractor’s
performance.

The COR is responsible for monitoring, assessing, and communicating the
technical performance of the contractor and assisting the contractor.
The COR will have the responsibility for documenting the inspection and
evaluation of the contractor’s work performance. Government surveillance
may occur under the Inspection of Services clause for any services
relating to the contract.

**Performance Management Approach**

The performance-based \[PWS or SOO\] structures the acquisition around
“what” services are required as opposed to “how” the contractor should
perform the work. This QMP will define the performance management
approach taken by the \[agency name\] to monitor, manage, and take
appropriate action on the contractor’s performance against expected
outcomes or performance objectives communicated in the \[PWS or SOO\].
Performance management rests upon developing a capability to review and
analyze information generated through performance metrics. The ability
to make decisions based on the analysis of performance data is the
cornerstone of performance management. The data generated in a
performance management approach provides information that indicates
whether or not expected outcomes for required services are being
achieved adequately by the contractor.

Performance management also represents a significant shift from the more
traditional Quality Assurance (QA) concepts in several ways. Performance
management focuses on assessing whether or not outcomes are being
achieved and migrates away from scrutiny on compliance with the
processes and practices used to achieve the outcome. The only exceptions
to process reviews are those required by law (Federal, State, and local)
and compelling business situations such as safety and health. An outcome
focus provides the contractor flexibility to continuously improves and
innovate over the course of the contract as long as the critical
outcomes expected are being achieved at the desired levels of
performance.

**Performance Management Strategy**

The contractor’s internal quality control system will set forth the
staffing and procedures for self inspecting the quality, timeliness,
responsiveness, customer satisfaction, and other performance
requirements in the PWS. The contractor will utilize its internal
quality control system to assess and report their performance to the
designated Government representative.

The Government representative will monitor performance and review
performance reports furnished by the contractor to determine how the
contractor is performing against communicated performance objectives.
The Government will make decisions based on performance measurement
metric data and notify the contractor of those decisions. The contractor
will be responsible for making required changes in processes and
practices to ensure performance is managed effectively.

**Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan**

The Vendor shall develop and maintain effective quality assurance
metrics to ensure services are performed in accordance with this Task
Order and include the Quality Assurance metrics either within the
Quality Metrics Table or as an attachment to this QMP with their quote.
The focus of quality assurance is on the processes used to deliver.
Quality assurance ensures that processes are used effectively to produce
quality project deliverables. It involves following and meeting
standards, continuously improving project work, and correcting project
defects.

[]{#_30j0zll .anchor}**Quality Control Plan**

The Vendor shall develop and maintain effective quality control metrics
to ensure services are performed in accordance with this Task Order and
include the Quality Control metrics either within the Quality Metrics
Table or as an attachment to this QMP with their quote. The Vendor shall
develop and implement procedures to identify, prevent, and ensure
non-recurrence of defective services. The Vendor’s quality control plan
is the means by which the Vendor assures that their work complies with
the requirement of the contract.

The focus of quality control is on the deliverables of the project.
Quality control monitors project deliverables to verify that the
deliverables are of acceptable quality and the customer is satisfied.

[]{#_1fob9te .anchor}

**Evaluation Methods**

The methods of evaluating Vendor compliance may vary depending on the
PWS. The COR is responsible for selection of the method(s) to be used
and the specific detailing of the method(s). The following describes
alternative methods of observation:

[]{#_3znysh7 .anchor}**100 Percent Evaluation**

This is the appropriate method of evaluating infrequent tasks or tasks
with stringent performance requirements, e.g., where safety or health is
a concern. With this method, performance is inspected/evaluated at each
occurrence. One hundred percent inspection is too expensive to be used
in most cases.

[]{#_2et92p0 .anchor}**Random Review**

This is an appropriate method of surveillance for recurring tasks.
Random sampling works best when the number of instances of the services
being performed is very large and a statistically valid sample can be
obtained.

[]{#_tyjcwt .anchor}

**Customer or Other Government Feedback**

Customer feedback can come from interaction with the general public or
through interaction with Government employees and other Government
Offices/Agencies. Although usually not a primary method, this is a
valuable supplement to more systematic methods. For example, in a case
where random sampling indicates unsatisfactory service, customer
complaints can be used as substantiating evidence. In certain situations
where customers can be relied upon to complain consistently when the
quality of performance is poor, e.g., dining facilities, building
services; customer surveys and customer complaints may be a primary
surveillance method.

**Performance Criteria **

**Acceptable Performance**

Acceptable performance meets the specified standard and does not exceed
the allowable deviation. The Government may conduct trend analysis of
surveillance results to increase or decrease the level of surveillance
for specific requirements.

**Unacceptable Performance**

Unacceptable performance does not meet the specified standard and
exceeds the allowable deviation/acceptable quality level. The contractor
may receive deductions or even termination based on failure to perform/
deliver at the acceptable quality level. The following criteria apply
for determining appropriate action:

> 1\. *Notifications.* Consistent with FAR Part 49, the CO shall notify the
> service provider of failure to meet standards through quality
> performance monitoring forms, cure notices, or show cause notices and
> shall inform the service provider project manager or designated
> alternate of such notices.
>
> 2\. *Deductions.* The Government has the right to withhold a percentage
> or value of payment of the iteration cost for performing particular
> services based on failure to meet performance standards/metrics. The
> percentage or value of such withholdings is identified in the Quality
> Measures/Metrics table.
>
> 3\. *Termination.* If the CO determines that the contractor has failed to
> perform to the extent that a termination for default is justified, the
> CO shall issue a notice of termination, consistent with FAR Part 49.
>
> 4\. *Government Remedies.* “The Government Contracting Officer shall
> follow FAR 52.212-4, “Contract Terms and Conditions-Commercial Items”
> for Vendor’s failure to perform satisfactory services or failure to
> correct non-conforming services.”

**Performance Criteria Quality Measures / Metrics**

**QUALITY MEASURES / METRICS**

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Process / Deliverable**                                                                   **Delivery / Performance Standards**                       **Allowable Deviation / Acceptable Quality Level**                                                                                                                                                         **Method of Assessment**                                                                                                               **Date/**                                                                                                                 **Iteration Payment Impact**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **Schedule**                                                                                                              
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ***Instructions: Indicate Tasks from SOO. Please add any additional tasks, as needed. ***   ***Instructions: Indicate expectations or standards. ***   ***Instructions: Indicate “none” if there is no allowable deviation or e.g., “100% of calendar arrangements are correctly processed within 6 days”, or “2 day slippage allowance from due date”, etc.***   ***Instructions: Indicate how often this task will be reviewed, e.g., “Random review”, “100% review”, or “Quarterly review”, etc.***   ***Instructions: Indicate when the task is due with a specific date or e.g., “On-going”, “daily”, “quarterly”, etc. ***   ***Instructions:***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ***Indicate what the associated impact to payment of iteration is or if not applicable***

  **TO BE COMPLETED/PROPOSED BY QUOTER**

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Additional Quality Metrics Table Template from [*18F*](https://github.com/18F/technology-budgeting/blob/master/handbook.md#appendix-b-sample-quality-assessment-surveillance-plan-qasp)

Here is an example of a Quality Metrics Table that includes a QASP.
[*Source*](https://github.com/18F/technology-budgeting/blob/master/handbook.md#appendix-b-sample-quality-assessment-surveillance-plan-qasp)

  Deliverable            Performance Standard(s)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Acceptable Quality Level                                                                                                                                                           Method of Assessment
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Tested Code            Code delivered under the order must have substantial test code coverage and a clean code baseVersion-controlled, public repository of code comprising the product, which will remain in the government domain                                                                                                   Minimum of 90% test coverage of all code                                                                                                                                           Combination of manual review and automated testing
  Properly Styled Code   [GSA 18F Front-End Guide](https://frontend.18f.gov/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 linting errors and 0 warnings                                                                                                                                                    Combination of manual review and automated testing
  Accessibility          Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1 AA standards                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0 errors reported using an automated scanner, and 0 errors reported in manual testing                                                                                              [Pa11y](https://github.com/pa11y/pa11y)
  Deployed               Code must successfully build and deploy into staging environment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Successful build with a single command                                                                                                                                             Combination of manual review and automated testing
  Documented             All dependencies are listed and the licenses are documented. Major functionality in the software/source code is documented. Individual methods are documented inline using comments that permit the use of documentation-generation tools such as [JSDoc](http://usejsdoc.org/). A system diagram is provided   Combination of manual review and automated testing, if available                                                                                                                   Manual review
  Security               [OWASP Application Security Verification Standard 4.0, Level 2](https://www.owasp.org/images/d/d4/OWASP_Application_Security_Verification_Standard_4.0-en.pdf)                                                                                                                                                  Code submitted must be free of medium- and high-level static and dynamic security vulnerabilities                                                                                  Clean tests from a static testing SaaS (such as [npm audit](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/audit)) and from [OWASP ZAP](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Zed_Attack_Proxy_Project), along with documentation explaining any false positives
  User research          Usability testing and other user research methods must be conducted at regular intervals throughout the development process (not just at the beginning or end)                                                                                                                                                  Artifacts from usability testing and/or other research methods with end users are available at the end of every applicable sprint, in accordance with the vendor’s research plan   Manual review

#### 

Appendix C: Examples of TEP rating systems
------------------------------------------

The TEP and contracting experts have wide laditude in determining how
they are going to be evaluating proposals. Picking a system in which
rating will be made is important in how the overall selection is going
to be made.

### Confidence Factors

A confidence rating system reflected the government’s confidence on
whether a vendor will be able to successfully build the product based on
the proposal submitted.

**High Confidence:** The Government has ***high confidence*** that the
Offeror understands the requirement, proposes a sound approach, and will
be successful in performing the contract with ***little or no***
Government intervention.

**Some Confidence:** The Government has ***some confidence*** that the
Offeror understands the requirement, proposes a sound approach, and will
be successful in performing the contract with ***some*** Government
intervention.

**Low Confidence:** The Government has ***low confidence*** that the
Offeror understands the requirement, proposes a sound approach, or will
be successful in performing the contract ***even with*** Government
intervention.

### Adjectival Ratings

An adjectival rating system for scoring will be utilized and the
technical panel will determine final scoring, based on a consensus. The
following is the adjectival rating system that will be used to evaluate
proposals.

**Exceptional:** Greatly exceeds all minimum requirements of the
criteria; has a high probability of success; contains no weaknesses or
deficiencies.

**Good:** Exceeds all the minimum requirements of the criteria; has an
above average probability of success; contains no significant weaknesses
and only minor, correctable weaknesses exist.

**Acceptable:** Meets all the minimum requirements of the criteria; has
an average probability of success; any weaknesses can readily be
corrected; no deficiencies exist.

**Unacceptable:** Fails to meet the minimum requirements of the
criteria; contains multiple significant weaknesses or one or more.

Appendix D: Example Design Challenges
-------------------------------------

Typically a design challenge should resemble the type of work that the
government hopes to procure. This can take a variety of forms, from
working software proof-of-concepts to visual artifacts that include
journey maps and user personas, examples of what product development
would look like through various tools such as Jira and Confluence. It is
important that the [*technical evaluation
panel*](#technical-evaluation-panel-tep) has a cross representation of
digital experts to evaluate the vendor technical solutions for best
practices.

Here is an example of a recent design challenge put on by CMS.

### 

### [*The Medicare Payment System Modernization*](https://usds.gov/projects/medicare-payment-program) [*Design Challenge*](https://fcw.com/blogs/lectern/2019/07/kelman-non-traditional-contractors.aspx)

Imagine that you have come upon the large monolithic legacy system
responsible for executing and maintaining the workflow that processes
Medicare claims in order to make payments to service providers. The
maintenance of the system is proving to be unsustainable as time
continues. We want you to modernize this system.

In addition to the existing payment processing system, there are other
parts of the agency that are involved in experimental payment workflows
that traditionally operated outside of the legacy payment system. We
want those experimental workflows incorporated into this modernization
effort. This will require the integration of two very different work
streams, development processes, and development lifecycles. The Medicare
payment processing workflow is ever-evolving to respond to legislative
changes and new industry paradigms. The existing system and any
subsequent changes to modernize it, must take into consideration the
flexibility that is required to quickly react to these types of changes
so that business is not interrupted.

This work is fundamental to the agency’s mission and will require teams
that can take pragmatic steps toward modernizing the legacy systems as
well as supporting new payment workflows in the future. Due to the
complexity of the work, teams must be comfortable with requirements that
are vague, undefined, or conflicting. Thus, we will not provide a
detailed list of requirements. Instead, we will provide an outline of
how we will evaluate your solution, and a list of the outcomes we will
measure and use in the evaluation.

CMS has given you the following goals while approaching the
modernization of this system:

-   Sustainability: the system, resources, and processes must maintain
    > their current levels of service during modernization efforts

-   Agility: the system needs to evolve, sustainably, at the same speed
    > as the business

-   Integration: systems involved in making payments, and other CMS
    > business functions, need the option to use modern technology to
    > interact with the current state of the legacy system.

-   Usability: users’ interaction with the legacy system need to easily
    > identify and extract the exact data they need, when they need it.

With the goals provided and as part of this design challenge, CMS wishes
you to help develop of a longer-term vision and product strategy for
this modernization effort.

Because the existing system is so large and has many groups that are
involved with maintaining it, there are competing business needs that
will require prioritizing development work. Knowing what to immediately
modernize can change based on shifting business requirements. These
potential changes shouldn’t impact the longer-term vision of the
modernization effort.

The business owners of the current system have identified modules that
need “modernization”. In addition to these modules that currently run on
the mainframe to support existing payment methodologies, Other business
owners are developing new payment methodologies and would like the new
system to be flexible enough to accommodate both existing and new
methods simultaneously. CMS executives want to understand both why and
how the work that you’ve chosen to do accomplishes the project’s goals
that CMS has provided and the vision that you have created.

**Business Owner 1:** In order to support existing fee-for-service
claims payment processing, maintenance is provided yearly on a specific
piece of business logic called “FQHC-Pricer”. The pricer that the
business owner wants you to address is currently written in COBOL and
has been maintained by CMS for 15 years. The pricer is a self-contained
module that does not require any database access or outside
dependencies. These yearly code changes typically take at least 8 months
to implement due to a waterfall process of requirements gathering,
planning, developing, testing, and deploying. The business owner wishes
to make changes to the pricer that can be pushed out to production in a
much more rapid cadence.

These files don’t have the most extensive testing associated with them.
CMS policy should have the expected outputs based on inputs but because
they are removed from the development lifecycle, their inputs/outputs
may or may not match what was actually development. You should plan for
these inconsistencies by providing how you will determine parity and
address each discrepancy, if any.

**Business Owner 2:** In order to integrate new payment methodologies
into the existing business workflow, creating services that can be
reused is desired. One such example of a service is identifying
participants. Each new payment methodology, called models, requires
identifying participating providers or institutions. Once participants
have been identified and other required information provided, that
“file” needs to loaded into the legacy system. There are many models,
each with their own development teams, that submit participant
information to the legacy system in various different formats. The
legacy system requires a standardized format. Explain how you will
address the issue of lack of standard submissions and a service-design
workflow.

**Deliverables**

You are to prioritize the above business owners’ needs with your
deliverables and provide justifications for decisions made. These
decisions should be in sync with your proposed long-term vision for this
system. CMS is looking to you to provide software artifacts that deliver
on the business needs and support those artifacts with research, design,
and product roadmaps.

Appendix E: Sample Analysis of Procurement Options
--------------------------------------------------

In deciding which procurement strategy would best fit the needs of a
product, developing an analysis of alternatives for the different
options that are available helps provide data to make decisions.

Here is an example of an analysis of alternatives that the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) did when determining which
contracting vehicle would best support the product.

### Medicare Payment Modernization Contracting Strategy

As modernization efforts transitions from proof of concepts on the
Fiscal Intermediary Standard System (FISS) to a production roadmap,
serious thought must be put into the contracting strategy to support
this effort for the next 5-10 years. ***Setting up the correct
contracting strategy has the largest impact on the probability of
success on this effort***. The FISS system is the initial target for
proof of concepts to be transitioned into production, this effort
shouldn’t be limited to just that system. This is a unique opportunity
to synthesize diverse Medicare payment systems. Including the following:

> · Common Working File (CWF)
>
> · Multi-Carrier System (MCS)
>
> · VIPS Medicare Shared System (VMS)
>
> · CMMI models

To achieve the goal of a successful payment modernization effort,
contracting strategy must enable the following factors:

> · Ability to award new tasks quickly
>
> · Quality of technical talent available via contract vehicle
>
> · Contractor Digital Service experience and approach (this is
> different than “agile development”)
>
> · Familiarity with CMS systems, specifically complex business logic
> associated with Medicare FFS payment processing
>
> · Ability to define development and infrastructure requirements at the
> BPA level so details are not missed in task orders

There exists a variety of contracting options, each with pros and cons.
It is the effort of this document to determine which contracting option
best suits needs for this modernization effort. Ultimately, the decision
on choosing the right contracting strategy needs to answer the simple
question of: Will this vehicle/strategy position the Medicare Payment
Modernization effort to have the greatest probability of success?

***SPARC***

OIT at CMS has an existing IDIQ, SPARC, that is the agency’s answer to
agile, waterfall, and hybrid development methodologies. This vehicle has
a \$25B ceiling that houses over 140 different vendors. Its goal is to
be the one-stop shop for agency development. There are certainly
advantages to leveraging work already completed as well as drawbacks to
leveraging a generic development contacting vehicle.

  Pros                                                                           Cons
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  The IDIQ is already existing and vendors have been pre-vetted.                 The vendor pool is not specialized to any project.
  The vendor pool is diverse based on company size.                              The vendor pool is so large the agile contracting is impossible.
  The ceiling on the IDIQ is extremely high – low risk of breaking through it.   The probability of protest per contract is substantially higher due to more vendor bids and issues with small business sizes.
  Orders under \$10M are not protestable.                                        Agile methodologies, user-center design, user design, and DevOps practices are not baked into the IDIQ and thus need to be included with each proposal. This bloats the proposal with boilerplate language while increasing the surface area of protest.
  All contract types permissible giving CMS added flexibility.                   Most vendors are not familiar with CMS payment processing and could struggle to meet the quick on boarding and rapidly changing needs of this project
  Helping CMS meet small business goals.                                         Ability to award new tasks quickly.

***SPARC with on-ramp***

This option has the ability to continue leveraging SPARC while allowing
for new vendors to be added to the IDIQ. This list includes all of the
Pros and Cons listed previous with SPARC with the following
consideration.

  Pros                                                                                                              Cons
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Ability to add new entrants to the cadre of pre-qualified vendors that could compete for agile development work   High protest probability - would require a competitive process which could be protested – there are two points of protest because we already have a large vetted pool of contractors plus the source selection decision
                                                                                                                    Additional resources need on OAGM and program side to manage source selection process

***GWAC – Alliant 2, CIO SP3***

  Pros                                                       Cons
  ---------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Existing pre-vetted cadre of qualified vendors             BIC designation which will help CMS meet OMB targets
  Orders under \$10M not protestable                         Agency could receive criticism for not using SPARC which was intended, in part, for agile development; however, climate is pushing agencies toward Category Management and SUM/BIC use
  All contract types permissible                             Not all vendors will have subject matter expertise with CMS systems or payment processing
  Alliant 2 explicitly includes agile development services   

***Agency Wide BPA***

  Pros                                                                                                                                                                           Cons
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Targeted competition possible; however, must provide RFQ to any company requesting it                                                                                          Vendors are not tailored to the project’s specific goals.
  Ability to reach new contractors who have entered the market for initial competition                                                                                           Initial award and any calls are protestable
  BPA holders will be specifically selected based upon demonstrated ability to develop and deploy digital services using agile methodologies, user centered design and DevOps.   New umbrella contract vehicle is resource intensive versus placing individual orders against existing contract vehicles
  Could receive OMB designation as a SUM vehicle but requires mandatory use policy and other reporting requirements                                                              If significant overlap to existing SUM/BIC vehicle, modified business case to OMB required
                                                                                                                                                                                 If approved by OMB, and BPA put in place, CMS mandatory use policy and rigorous reporting requirements needed
                                                                                                                                                                                 Inability to add new contractors to mix after award of BPA
                                                                                                                                                                                 Risk of ending up with a significant number of vendors in pool
                                                                                                                                                                                 Agency could receive criticism for not using SPARC which was intended, in part, for agile development

***GSA Schedule Task Order Competitions***

The GSA Schedule is available for individual task orders as they are
necessary.

  Pros                                                                                                                                    Cons
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Existing pre-vetted cadre of qualified vendors                                                                                          Not a SUM or BIC vehicle.
  New contractors are constantly being added to the industrial base.                                                                      Hundreds of vendors; however, FPDS data shows that \[x\] proposals are received on average
  Targeted competition possible (to reasonably ensure receipt of at least 3 quotations); must provide RFQ to any company requesting it.   Limited to FFP or L-H; however, these contract types are consistent with commercial practices for buying agile development
                                                                                                                                          Potential for new entrant who has no prior knowledge of complexity of CMS programs; however, discriminating evaluation criteria can mitigate this risk when this issue is critical to CMS
                                                                                                                                          Agency could receive criticism for not using SPARC which was intended, in part, for agile development

***Project Specific BPA off of GSA Schedule***

This is a contracting strategy that creates a BPA tailored to the
project. There have been plenty of lessons learned from constructing
project specific BPAs such as ADELE.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Pros                                                                                                                                                                                      Cons
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  The vendors are tailored to the project’s needs                                                                                                                                           Initial award and any calls are protestable

  Contracts can be issued as new problems or requirements are encountered.                                                                                                                  Multiple program specific BPAs are resource intensive for the agency to award and manage

  Smaller pool of specialized vendors.                                                                                                                                                      If the vendors are smaller companies, there is risk of being unable to meet the needs of the total work necessary for the project.

  The pool of vendors all become domain experts as the project matures.                                                                                                                     If significant overlap to existing SUM/BIC vehicle, modified business case to OMB required

  Agile methodologies, user-center design, user design, and DevOps practices can be baked into the BPA. This avoids proposals with boilerplate language while focusing on the objectives.   If approved by OMB, and BPA put in place, CMS mandatory use policy and rigorous reporting requirements needed

  The base period on awarded contracts is shorter.                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                            
  CMS is put into the position of less risk by requiring results from vendors faster.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                            
  CMS does not have the pressure to award existing vendors on a contract re-compete due to transition time shorten via domain knowledge. This drive competition.                            

  Avoids single points of failure. Re-competes are actually encouraged.                                                                                                                     
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While there are a variety of potential contracting options available, to
date, the most successful approach to complex system development at CMS
using an innovative, Digital Service approach, was done on the Quality
Payment Program.

Some high-level stats on the QPP BPA to date:

> · There have been 16 task orders awarded under ADELE.
>
> · All vendors are small businesses.
>
> · Every ADELE BPA holder has won an award at this point.
>
> · All ADELE task orders have been competitively awarded.
>
> · Zero Protests.
>
> · The average procurement action lead time is 67 days.
>
> · The average Period of Performance for an ADELE task order is 2.2
> years.
>
> · Responses were typically limited to 20-25 pages with 2-week
> turnarounds.
>
> · Low dollar value allows for COR II rather than COR III.

***A Tale of Two Contract Vehicles: A Retrospective***

As previously listed, the goals for our contracting strategy are:

> · Ability to award new tasks quickly
>
> · Quality of technical talent available via contract vehicle
>
> · Contractor Digital Service experience and approach (this is
> different than “agile development”)
>
> · Familiarity with CMS systems, specifically complex business logic
> associated with Medicare FFS payment processing
>
> · Ability to define development and infrastructure requirements at the
> BPA level so details are not missed in task orders

CMS has experience over the past year issuing contracts through both
SPARC and ADELE and there are some great data points that can be
gathered to compare the two vehicles against the goals that we are
aiming for.

***Ability to award new tasks quickly***

Working in an agile fashion means not having all of the business
requirements upfront. Most of the time this process is impossible and a
vast majority of the time the initial business requirement gathering for
a complex system is incorrect. As new requirements come to light
throughout the modernization process, the ability to issue contracts
rapidly is necessary.

  **Vehicle**   **Ability to award new tasks quickly**
  ------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  SPARC         Competitive task orders averaged 139 days (19.9 weeks)
  ADELE BPA     Competitive task orders averaged 67 days. (9.5 weeks)

***Quality of technical talent available via contract vehicle***

Competition is vital in making sure the government is getting the best
possible vendor for the job. More vendors does not always mean better
competition. Contracts see the best competition when vendors specialize
in the work that issued. Overall competition increases as vendors learn
through previous proposals. Finding the sweet spot of the vendor pool
size that allows for competition and allows vendors to continuously
challenge each other to rise the skill level is important.

  **Vehicle**   **Quality of technical talent available via contract vehicle**
  ------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  SPARC         The density of high skilled vendors is variable. Roughly 5% of the total vendors have won a competitive proposal under SPARC.
  ADELE BPA     100% of the vendors have won a competitive proposal under ADELE. Each one of these competitive proposals included a design challenge that required working software and designs to be submitted.

***Contractor Digital Service experience and approach (this is different
than “agile development”)***

User-centered design, user research, devops, and product management are
required to deliver modern digital services. These skill sets along with
an agile methodology are necessary in delivering working software in
small increments allowing for quickly changing development and design as
new requirements are discovered.

  **Vehicle**   **Contractor Digital Service Experience**
  ------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  SPARC         Partners offer agile, waterfall, and hybrid development methodology. Having digital service skill sets were not prerequisites for joining SPARC.
  ADELE BPA     100% of the vendors on ADELE went through market research making sure that modern digital services and agile development practices were core to their business.

***Familiarity with CMS systems, specifically complex business logic
associated with Medicare FFS payment processing***

Having a background with CMS programs allows vendors to hit the ground
running when contracts are awarded. The amount of time that is required
to either onboard or transition work is diminished when vendors already
know systems that they will be working on. Having these familiarities
allows for the period of performance to decrease and thus protecting CMS
from getting locked into a vendor that underperforms. In addition to
familiarity, having a smaller vendor pool means that contractors and
their employees already have accounts, access and the ability to quickly
begin work after contract award.

In some cases it takes over two months for *new* contractors to get
access to CMS systems, this would make any attempt at iterative
development dead on arrival.

  **Vehicle**   **Familiarity with CMS systems.**
  ------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  SPARC         The average period of performance for a SPARC task order is 3.8 years.
  ADELE BPA     The average period of performance for an ADELE task order is 2.2 years.

***Ability to define development and infrastructure requirements at the
BPA level so details are not missed in task orders***

Having certain requirements that can be found in all contracts that are
intended to go out under the vehicle can benefit from having these
requirements baked into the vehicle directly vs requiring justification
on each contract. This protects CMS from potentially missing common
contracting needs with each contract issued. This also cuts down on the
size of the proposal that needs to be reviewed with each task order.

  **Vehicle**   **Requirements baked into the vehicle**
  ------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  SPARC         None.
  ADELE BPA     Agile methodologies. Digital Service requirements.

Appendix F: Sample Statement of Objectives
------------------------------------------

### 

Modern Payment Services for the

Medicare Fee for Service (FFS) Program

Statement of Objectives (SOO)

### Overview and Background Information

As we create modernized systems at CMS, it also creates the need for
those systems to be able to communicate via real-time system-to-system
interfaces, powered by industry-standard open-source technology for
APIs. One of the most critical areas for systems across CMS to
interoperate with is with the Medicare claims ecosystem. For instance,
the Quality Payment Program (QPP) currently relies on a once-a-year flat
file transfer of payment adjustments to the Medicare Administrative
Contractors (MACs) to implement the actual payment rules that form the
purpose of the entire program. As other CMS systems modernize to provide
more information in real time, as well as rapidly implementing new
functionality to keep up with the constant innovations in Medicare, the
inflexibility of the shared systems that are responsible for claims
processing will continue to grow as a barrier to innovation if not
addressed. The shared systems, as the system that processes
approximately 1.2 billion claims a year, worth close to \$400 billion
dollars, must be able to change to meet the needs of the future, without
disruption to the critical services provided in the present.

A promising step in this direction is the Medicare fee-for-service
modernization effort led jointly by the Applications Management Group
(AMG), the Provider Billing Group (PBG), and the Medicare Contractor
Management Group (MCMG) at CMS. Together with an existing shared systems
maintainer, they have embarked on an effort to identify specific
projects within the shared systems that are effective incremental steps
towards modernization and have been building out proofs of concept to
determine the viability of each project. The United States Digital
Service (USDS) has recently joined this effort, bringing an additional
focus on identifying modules of the system that may be separated from
the mainframe deployment and deployed into a production-ready cloud
environment, enabling fully automated unit testing, integration,
deployment, and monitoring and alerting practices, as well as the use of
a wider array of open source tools and current industry standard
technologies.

The Medicare **Fee for Service** **(FFS) shared systems** are comprised
of four different systems: the Fiscal Intermediary Shared System (FISS)
which processes Medicare Part A claims and some Medicare Part B claims,
the Multi-Carrier System (MCS) which processes the bulk of Medicare Part
B claims, the ViPS Medicare System (VMS) for durable medical equipment
(DME), prosthetics, orthotics, and supplies claims, and the Common
Working File (CWF), which provides a “national view” of claims
processing, and performs additional eligibility verification,
utilization history, and pre-payment validation from that perspective.
Together, these four systems form the key core of systems which
determine if and how Medicare claims are paid out. These systems are
currently hosted on the CMS Virtual Data Centers (VDCs) and consist of
COBOL programs running on IBM z/OS mainframes in IBM’s Customer
Information Control System (CICS) environment. The primary users of
these systems are the Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs), who
are responsible for receiving and processing claims from healthcare
providers in a timely and efficient manner. The MACs interface with the
shared systems through green-screen terminal interactions, and via
flat-file uploads and downloads from the shared systems. In addition,
each of the MACs has built their own ‘mid-tier’ systems, which are
proprietary systems designed to handle the workload and interface with
the shared systems.

The ongoing modernization effort is an attempt to take an incremental
approach to modernization – it focuses on finding portions or aspects of
the shared systems which may be good ‘proof of concepts’ for a
particular goal, and then setting a team to achieve that goal. The goals
of modernization are plentiful and varied, but they include updating the
languages and tools to current industry standards to allow the system to
be updated more easily and more frequently, refactors of the code to
resolve specific pain points, and modernizing the way that the shared
systems interact with other systems. This last point is critical, as CMS
is very interested to adopt an Application Program Interface (API)-first
approach to FFS modernization, making the functionality of the shared
systems accessible via a modern, REST API. This approach will drive
innovation in the way downstream systems make use of the systems and
their data, leading to better experiences for providers, beneficiaries,
and the entire Medicare community.

The ultimate goal of this incremental approach is to develop and create
processes and expertise that will accelerate and scale, enabling
long-term, large scale modernization in an agile manner. If the shared
systems are going to keep up with the pace of innovation in Medicare in
the long-term, allowing the system to adapt to needs five, ten, or
twenty years in the future that are impossible to predict now, we must
develop strategies for making substantial changes and improvements to
the system quickly. At this point in time, we don’t have the experience
to predict and plan changes at that scale, and so our focus is on
delivering and learning from smaller scale proof of concepts. We expect
these proof of concepts, though they start at a small scale, to form the
blueprints for repeatable processes for creating modularity, defining
system interdependencies, updating to modern languages and technologies,
and in general building a system that we can confidently change at
larger scales with confidence that we will not disrupt the critical
operations that the system supports in the present.

#### How we expect this team to work

We expect a successful Modern Payment Services team to be flexible and
competent in solving both infrastructure and application development
problems, effectively applying common practices from successful private
companies to FFS Modernization efforts. This team will be responsible
both for driving progress as a partner on the effort to modernize
specific modules of the FFS shared systems, as well as building out the
modern infrastructure to host those modernized modules. This is an
exploratory effort, and we expect that the specific goals and objectives
of the team may shift over time as we learn more about the problem
space.

The FFS Modernization project is utilizing the Agile methodology, which
is a substantial shift from the waterfall-based operation of the core of
the FFS shared systems development. This new agile process and existing
waterfall process will need to co-exist and effectively interoperate if
this modernization is successful. We expect this team to have extensive
experience in effective agile environments, and a deep and thorough
understanding of the core principles of the Agile approach and why they
work. We will also expect this team to be comfortable explaining and
implementing agile without relying on pre-existing frameworks such as
Scrum or Kanban, as the team will be expected to first adapt to the
existing agile process used for modernization, and then play a role in
helping to evaluate and iterate on that process based on its merits in
this particular situation, rather than on its adherence to an existing
framework. In addition, we expect the team will be generally familiar
with tools supporting an agile process and will be able to adopt the
tools already in use (e.g., JIRA, Confluence, HipChat), as well as
suggest new tools as appropriate. These tools will be essential to
joining the collaboration with the existing members of the modernization
effort, which includes several groups at CMS from the Center for
Medicare (CM) and Office of Information Technology (OIT), as well as
modernization teams from the existing system maintainer, Perspecta.

### Problem Statement/Objectives

CMS seeks the skills of a **Modern Payment Services** team that is
well-versed in industry standard software architecture and development
practices using modern languages and tools, to join this ongoing
modernization effort on the FFS shared systems which will enable more
flexible development and real-time system-to-system integrations with
systems across CMS, such as quality payment systems, provider and
beneficiary support systems, etc.

We lay out two objectives below – one focused on building and
maintaining cloud infrastructure, and one focused on a collaborative
team joining existing proof of concept efforts undertaken by the
maintainer modernization team.

Objectives

### **Develop, monitor, and maintain a cloud infrastructure for modernized modules, using a DevOps informed approach to application deployment and maintenance**

USDS has begun developing a cloud infrastructure which is ultimately
intended to serve as the core environment in which modernized modules
will be deployed. We are looking for a team who can continue to iterate,
monitor, and maintain this system as the needs and scope of its
importance within the shared systems ecosystem evolves. We would expect
that this would be a scrum team of 3-4, focusing on DevOps/SRE
competencies, with some app development and project management
expertise.

Here are some specific areas of focus for the **Infrastructure** scrum
team:

**Enable effective, production-ready cloud operations**

> · Found and nurture a DevOps culture following best practices laid out
> in the SRE book\[1\]
>
> · Adopt and champion effective tooling to support a DevOps approach,
> making effective use of tools already available (such as Splunk and
> New Relic)
>
> · Determine the risk tolerance of the modernized modules and devise
> processes and infrastructure that ensure an appropriate level of
> availability
>
> · Implement practical and effective monitoring and alerting to enable
> efficient detection and response to any discovered defects,
> availability incidents, or security incidents
>
> · Provide a team capable of fast and effective incident response which
> mitigates issues within hours, and transparently communicates the
> incident status to stakeholders
>
> o Incident response should have battle-tested mechanisms for rapidly
> contacting and collaborating existing shared system developers and
> maintainers

**Build tools to empower and accelerate development, testing, and
deployment in the cloud**

> · Design and build infrastructure tooling to enable testing and
> development that allows all stakeholders to have high confidence that
> shared system updates function as expected, especially with respect to
> their interaction and interface with other systems
>
> o Develop performance testing methodologies to ensure that updates
> will not cause unacceptable negative impacts on nightly batch cycle
> processing time.
>
> · Build and maintain development, staging, and production environments
>
> · Implement deployment tools that allow for fast, push-button
> automated deployment and rollback of high availability applications
>
> · Ensure tools are easy to use for development teams new to or
> unfamiliar with modern cloud infrastructure, and with varying levels
> of engineering expertise
>
> · Improve and maintain a continuous integration system to build and
> test updates
>
> · Ensure the system is highly secure, and has a well understood threat
> model which is actively monitored and updated
>
> · Help navigate security compliance process to ensure efficient
> delivery of updates on a regular schedule, for example gaining
> approval of necessary Security Impact Analyses and supporting the
> aspects of the shared systems’ Security Control Assessments impacted
> by this work

###  

### **Join and participate in selection, design, development, and deployment of proof of concepts and production modernization modules**

The existing modernization team, consisting of CMS (AMG, PBG, MCMG and
USDS) and the maintainer modernization team from Perspecta, is
continuing to identify and develop modules that will provide modern
interfaces to the FFS shared systems, allow for more flexible updates to
the shared systems, and resolve pain points for providers,
beneficiaries, MACs, and maintainers.

We are looking for an Application and Research team to join as members
of one or more of the three scrum teams which are currently working on
developing and delivering proof of concepts. We expect this team to
bring practical expertise in building modern APIs, architecting modern
distributed systems, cloud infrastructure, modern development tools, and
agile development processes to the proof of concept process. We also
expect for this team to bring a strong user research and service design
background, to help inform and advise CMS on the best path for
modernization moving forward. The existing members of the team, from the
system maintainer Perspecta, have considerable valuable expertise in the
FFS system itself, its architecture and functionality, the technologies
used to implement it and their strengths and limitations. They are very
familiar with the pain points facing the infrastructure and have a
number of ideas on how those could be addressed. They are also extremely
familiar with the business processes around FFS claims processing, which
is valuable information that should be used as the starting point for
the user research and service design elements of this team. We are
looking for a robust collaboration between these two groups, leveraging
the existing strengths of both groups and providing opportunities for
each group to learn from the other.

While we don’t expect expertise with Medicare claims processing or the
shared systems, as Perspecta will be primarily providing that, some
prior experience with Medicare claims data or processing would be
valuable for this team to have to enable a smoother integration and
collaboration with existing teams.

We expect that a team of around 4-7 would be appropriate for this work,
with that team either split between embedding on two existing sprint
teams or concentrating on a larger effort on a single sprint team. We
expect that this team would have primary competencies in modern
application development and API design, user experience research and
service design, as well as product and agile project management
expertise.

Here are some specific areas we would like this **Application and
Research** team to focus on;

**Effective use of modern technologies and methodologies**

> · Embed developers on existing sprint teams, writing and review code
> required to enable each module to be effectively used via a modern
> interface, and if necessary, deployed into a modern cloud environment
>
> · Effectively utilize modern technology within the modules where it
> will add substantial value and is an appropriate solution, while also
> recognizing areas where the benefits of migrating to a modern
> technology are not substantial enough to warrant the move
>
> · Assist in building modern development environment and testing tools
> to facilitate maintenance and ongoing development of modules
>
> · Ensure that the quality of the system remains high throughout the
> shift to using modern Agile processes for development, testing, and
> deployment
>
> o Provide mechanisms for thorough and efficient testing, ensuring the
> rate of defects in the code is at a threshold determined by CMS to be
> appropriate for the extremely critical sensitivity of this system
>
> o Ensure the system is highly secure, and has a well understood threat
> model which is actively monitored and updated
>
> o Help navigate security compliance process for cloud environments to
> ensure efficient delivery of updates on a regular schedule
>
> o Assess and optimize the performance impact of incorporating
> modernized modules in the existing system

**Collaborative user research to inform, propose, design, and execute on
projects that achieve modernization goals**

> · Perform user research to determine the impact (both positive and
> negative) of each module on providers, beneficiaries, maintainers,
> MACs (including systems cycle run times) and CMS stakeholders, and use
> that understanding to provide suggestions to leverage technology to
> maximize the benefit of modernization to the Medicare ecosystem
>
> · Provide input and suggestions, stemming from research into the needs
> of users and the design of the system, on the overall goals of the FFS
> modernization program
>
> · Participate in the design and architecture of the proofs of concept
> and modernized modules in collaboration with the existing sprint
> teams, providing expertise on effective usage of current industry
> standard open source technologies
>
> · Develop, execute, and iterate on effective methodologies that allow
> the regular, efficient deployment of modernized modules to production

### Collaboration with existing groups

We expect this team’s work to be highly collaborative. The team will be
joining a preexisting modernization effort undertaken by several groups
within CMS, a USDS team, as well as a team already highly familiar with
the shared systems. The Modern Payment Services teams should identify
potential issues that could arise and interfere with their ability to
work effectively with the existing team and should have a plan to
address those issues. We have outlined important other teams and parties
below and specific expectations around each.

#### CMS FFS Modernization Team (OIT/AMG, CM/PBG, CM/MCMG, USDS)

The existing CMS FFS Modernization team consists of stakeholders from
the Office of Information Technology’s Applications Management Group and
Center for Medicare’s Provider Billing Group and Medicare Contractor
Management Group, as well as members of the U.S. Digital Service at HHS
team. These CMS stakeholders serve both as the leadership and product
management team for the FFS modernization effort and are responsible for
making decisions about what work will be done and the direction of the
project.

We expect the Modern Payment Services team to serve a crucial role in
working together with the CMS FFS Modernization team on a day to day
basis, ensuring that their goals are met, and providing information and
expert advice on upcoming decisions or project direction.

#### USDS Individual Contributors

In addition to USDS’ role as part of the CMS FFS Modernization team,
members of USDS are also serving in a number of roles as individual
contributors. This includes writing code, doing user research, and
generally participating in the FFS Modernization sprints as part of the
sprint teams. In general, we are currently providing expertise in areas
such as effective implementation of agile, practical design of modern
REST APIs, and practical use of cloud services, that we also expect that
the Modern Payment Services team to bring their expertise. This role
will shift for USDS as the project changes and matures.

We expect the Modern Payment Services team to start by engaging with the
USDS individual contributors to learn about what has already been built
and what the current state of the project is, and then to continue to
build off of the momentum and work that USDS has started.

#### Shared System Maintainer Modernization Team

The Shared System Maintainer Modernization team is a team from Perspecta
(the vendor currently responsible for maintaining FISS and MCS) which is
focused on identifying and delivering selected proofs of concept for the
FFS Modernization team. They have devoted three sprint teams running
3-week sprints, each focusing on a specific proof of concept. The
Perspecta team bring expertise in understanding of the way that the FFS
systems work, both from a technical implementation perspective, as well
as a business perspective. They also have a strong familiarity with the
existing waterfall change management system that FFS uses to launch
production software.

We expect the Modern Payment Services Application and Research team to
join as team members onto one or more of the existing proof of concept
teams with Perspecta, to provide complementary expertise and perspective
on the modernization effort. Together, we expect that this team will
build proof of concepts that serve CMS’s modernization goals, and that
are turned into production-ready modules that are actually deployed,
providing real value to providers, beneficiaries, MACs, and other CMS
stakeholders. We also expect that this team will join with Perspecta to
carry out user research to provide CMS with information and insight into
planning future proofs of concept and modernization modules.

We expect the Modern Payment Services Infrastructure team to build and
maintain infrastructure which supports the deployment of proof of
concepts and production-ready modernization modules developed by
Perspecta which make use of cloud environments. The expectation is that
Perspecta developers will be able to easily deploy applications on
existing infrastructure, and that the Infrastructure team will be very
aware of the needs of the proof of concept sprint teams and work in
tandem with them to deliver what they need without becoming an
impediment to progress.

### Interaction with other stakeholders

#### CMS Stakeholders

In addition to AMG, MCMG, and PBG, there are a number of other
stakeholders within CMS who will be affected by the FFS modernization
project. Our expectation for the Modern Payment Services teams is that
they will work to understand the goals and needs of all the CMS
stakeholders, and consider those in the design of the infrastructure, in
their contributions to the proofs of concept and production
modernization modules, and in their advice and input on the direction of
the modernization project.

#### Shared System Maintainers and Operators

In addition to the Maintainer Modernization Team, there are other teams
involved in maintaining and operating the Shared Systems. Specifically,
there are teams who maintain the Virtual Data Centers (VDCs), as well as
the testing contractor, STC, responsible for coordinating and executing
testing. These teams are responsible for various activities, include
deploying the software, maintaining the code for each of the shared
systems, testing and monitoring the system, and operating the
datacenter.

We expect the Modern Payment Services Infrastructure team to forge a
strong working relationship with these operational teams, especially as
we push to launch the first production modernization modules. It is
essential that this team be involved in the defect and incident response
procedures that already exist for the FFS shared systems, so interfacing
with the new cloud infrastructure does not create process gaps in the
operation of the highly critical existing mainframe infrastructure. It
is also essential that the Modern Payment Services Infrastructure team
include the existing operators, maintainers, and application developers
in their own incident response processes for issues with the cloud
infrastructure, so that issues can be solved correctly and efficiently
as quickly as possible.

#### Cloud Services Provider

As is common on other CMS projects such as QPP, AWS cloud services are
being procured through a vendor who is maintaining a network and
compliance framework on top of the existing AWS offerings. On QPP, this
was General Dynamics IT (GDIT).

We expect the Modern Payment Services Infrastructure team to forge a
strong working relationship with GDIT, so as to effectively work through
issues getting services provisioned or configured, understanding and
using the existing compliance infrastructure, and running incident
response operations.

#### Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs)

The Medicare Administrative Contractors, or MACs, are private health
care insurers that have been awarded a geographic jurisdiction to
process Medicare Part A and Part B medical claims, or DME claims for
Medicare FFS beneficiaries. CMS relies on a network of MACs to serve as
the primary operational contact between the Medicare FFS program and the
health care providers enrolled in the program. The MACs are the primary
users of the FFS Shared Systems, and also have a substantial amount of
involvement and input into how those shared systems work, as well as
lots of insight into how the business of Medicare FFS claims work.

One of the key benefits of modernizing the FFS Shared Systems is that it
will enable the MACs to improve the quality and efficiency of the
services that they provide to Medicare FFS providers and other claim
submitters, by enabling more real-time system-to-system interfaces
between the MACs’ internal systems and CMS’s shared systems.

We expect the Modern Payment Services Application and Research Team,
jointly with the existing Maintainer Modernization Team to research and
understand the current needs and pain points of the MACs, as well as
work directly with MAC implementation teams on proofs of concept their
following production modernization modules. The Maintainer Modernization
Team should have through their existing work on the shared systems, a
baseline of understanding about how the MACs work that can be leveraged
and built upon, while the MPS App and Research team is expected to bring
strong understanding and experience using modern user research and
[*service design*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_design)
techniques to accurately identify issues and design an effective
solution.

 
-

### Interaction with non-modernization development and deployment

As part of this modernization undertaking, we are looking to use Agile
techniques and methodology appropriately, developing a process which is
effective at driving improvement and responding to change while also
continues to effectively protect the critical availability, performance,
and security needs of the system.

The standard development and deployment process for the FFS systems is a
typical waterfall deployment process, with planning for changes that
will occur in January 2019 beginning six to nine months ahead of time
(July 2018 or even earlier). There are four quarterly releases,
occurring in January, April, July, and October. The majority of changes
that are made to the system are made in one of these four quarterly
releases. There does also exist an off-quarterly release process for
emergency fixes.

The existing process has been highly effective at meeting the critical
availability needs of the system, as well as maintaining the necessary
levels of performance and security. To accomplish this, however, has
involved a tradeoff which greatly limits the flexibility of the
deployment process by reducing the rate at which changes (and thus
instability) can be introduced into the system. The limitations of this
approach are an underlying cause for many of the pain points that are
motivating modernization.

One reason that the FFS Modernization team is piloting a move to a cloud
environment is to explore and establish mechanisms by which changes can
be made to production systems, meeting the same high availability,
performance, and security bar, while also allowing for the high degree
of flexibility and rapid response capabilities of a modern, agile
development approach. It is our expectation that the Modern Payment
Services teams will strive to achieve these objectives as well.

We expect the Modern Payment Services teams to contribute to and help
refine Agile development, testing, and deployment processes that ensure
availability, performance, and security at the same levels as the
existing systems. However, we also expect these teams to be cognizant of
the fact that we are making incremental changes to the way the FFS teams
work, and new processes must not disrupt the existing waterfall process
in ways that threaten the quality of the system. To this end, we expect
that the Modern Payment Services teams will become familiar with the
existing process as well, with help from the existing Maintainer
Modernization Team, so that they understand how to interact and
integrate with that system in an effective way.

\[1\] https://landing.google.com/sre/book/index.html

[^1]: *Big bang is a common term in software development when switching
    from one system to another. You can think of this as turning off the
    lights on one system and then turning on the lights on another. This
    approach is very risky with a high probability of failure.*